README.md, before:

# Data Interfaces for Triplet-based Distance Metric Learning

This repository contains code to interface with the data in the THINGS dataset (<a href="https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0223792">1</a> <a href="https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-020-00951-3">2</a>) that is relevant for distance metric learning. More datasets hopefully coming soon!

The code is close to production grade and provides an effective way to access triplet labeled datasets for distance metric learning.

## Requirements

* Python 3.8+
* more_itertools
* numpy
* scipy
* scikit-learn
* Pillow
* Tkinter

## Instructions for Use

### THINGS

1. Navigate to the <a href="https://osf.io/jum2f/">main THINGS dataset page on OSF</a> and download the Main folder as a zip archive.
2. Unzip the archive and its subarchives under folder {THINGS_ROOT}/Main.
3. Navigate to the "Revealing the multidimensional mental representations..." <a href="https://osf.io/z2784/">page on OSF</a> and download both the "data" and the "variables" folder as zip archives.
4. Unzip the two archives under folder {THINGS_ROOT}/Revealing.
5. Ask the corresponding author of the <a href="https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-020-00951-3">THINGS dataset</a> for the labeled triplet data.
6. Place the files under {THINGS_ROOT}/Revealing/triplets.

Take a look at the scripts in the tools/ directory, eg ```report_data_statistics.py```, and the ```ThingsDataInterface``` and ```ThingsReader``` classes. Hopefully it should be clear how to implement a PyTorch ```Dataset``` or a tool to write TensorFlow records.

## Dataset Splits

The code includes functionality to split the triplets into training, validation and test subsets - unit testing included. If desired, new splits can be implemented in the ```ThingsDataInterface``` class.

## Tools

All tools must be run from the parent folder of ditdml.

To see statistics like the number of images etc:

```
python ditdml/tools/report_data_statistics.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type quasi_original --seed 13
python ditdml/tools/report_data_statistics.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class --class-triplet-conversion-type all_instances --seed 13
python ditdml/tools/report_data_statistics.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class --class-triplet-conversion-type prototypes --seed 13
python ditdml/tools/report_data_statistics.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class_same_training_validation --class-triplet-conversion-type all_instances --seed 13
python ditdml/tools/report_data_statistics.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class_same_training_validation --class-triplet-conversion-type prototypes --seed 13

```

To interactively visualize labeled triplets:

```
python ditdml/tools/visualize_triplets.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type quasi_original --seed 23 --subset-name test --initial-triplet-index 200
python ditdml/tools/visualize_triplets.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class --class-triplet-conversion-type all_instances --seed 23 --subset-name training --initial-triplet-index 315715
python ditdml/tools/visualize_triplets.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class --class-triplet-conversion-type prototypes --seed 23 --subset-name validation --initial-triplet-index 42
python ditdml/tools/visualize_triplets.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class_same_training_validation --class-triplet-conversion-type all_instances --seed 23 --subset-name test --initial-triplet-index 101
python ditdml/tools/visualize_triplets.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class_same_training_validation --class-triplet-conversion-type prototypes --seed 23 --subset-name training --initial-triplet-index 22
```

(press left, right arrows)

To interactively visualize neighbors according to the provided embedding:

```
python ditdml/tools/visualize_neighbors.py --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --num-neighbors 4 --initial-class-index 1854
```

(press left, right arrows)

To interactively visualize the similarity matrix together with image pairs:

```
python ditdml/tools/visualize_similarity_matrix.py --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT}
```

(click on matrix elements in left pane)

Commit message:

Download instructions for IHSJ and Yummly.

README.md, after:

# Data Interfaces for Triplet-based Distance Metric Learning

Interfaces to the THINGS (<a href="https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0223792">1</a> <a href="https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-020-00951-3">2</a>), IHSJ (<a href="https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content/CVPR2021/papers/Roads_Enriching_ImageNet_With_Human_Similarity_Judgments_and_Psychological_Embeddings_CVPR_2021_paper.pdf">3</a> <a href="https://osf.io/cn2s3/">4</a>) and Yummly (<a href="file:///home/rdondera/Downloads/13152-Article%20Text-16669-1-2-20201228.pdf">5</a> <a href="https://vision.cornell.edu/se3/projects/cost-effective-hits/">6</a>) datasets that produce data for triplet-based distance metric learning.

The code is close to production grade and provides an effective way to access triplet labeled datasets for distance metric learning.

## Requirements

* Python 3.8+
* more_itertools
* numpy
* scipy
* scikit-learn
* Pillow
* Tkinter

## Instructions for Use

### THINGS

1. Navigate to the <a href="https://osf.io/jum2f/">main THINGS dataset page on OSF</a> and download the Main folder as a zip archive.
2. Unzip the archive and its subarchives to folder {THINGS_ROOT}/Main.
3. Navigate to the "Revealing the multidimensional mental representations..." <a href="https://osf.io/z2784/">page on OSF</a> and download both the "data" and the "variables" folder as zip archives.
4. Unzip the two archives to folder {THINGS_ROOT}/Revealing.
5. Ask the corresponding author of the <a href="https://www.nature.com/articles/s41562-020-00951-3">THINGS dataset</a> for the labeled triplet data.
6. Place the files in {THINGS_ROOT}/Revealing/triplets.

### IHSJC

1. Download the ImageNet dataset to folder {IHSJ_ROOT}/imagenet.
2. Navigate to the <a href="https://osf.io/7f96y/">IHSJ dataset page on OSF</a> and download the file data/deprecated/psiz0.4.1/catalog.hdf5 to folder {IHSJ_ROOT}/val/catalogs/psiz0.4.1 and data/deprecated/psiz0.4.1/obs-195.hd5 to folder {IHSJ_ROOT}/val/obs/psiz0.4.1.

### Yummly

1. Download the zip archive http://vision.cornell.edu/se3/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/food100-dataset.zip.
2. Unzip the archive to {YUMMLY_ROOT}.

Take a look at the scripts in the tools/ directory, eg ```report_data_statistics.py```, and the ```*DataInterface``` classes in order to understand how to implement a PyTorch ```Dataset``` / write TensorFlow records using on the data interfaces.

## Dataset Splits

The code includes functionality to split the triplets into training, validation and test subsets - unit testing included. If desired, new splits can be implemented in the ```ThingsDataInterface``` class.

## Tools

All tools must be run from the parent folder of ditdml.

To see statistics like the number of images etc:

```
python ditdml/tools/report_data_statistics.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type quasi_original --seed 13
python ditdml/tools/report_data_statistics.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class --class-triplet-conversion-type all_instances --seed 13
python ditdml/tools/report_data_statistics.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class --class-triplet-conversion-type prototypes --seed 13
python ditdml/tools/report_data_statistics.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class_same_training_validation --class-triplet-conversion-type all_instances --seed 13
python ditdml/tools/report_data_statistics.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class_same_training_validation --class-triplet-conversion-type prototypes --seed 13

```

To interactively visualize labeled triplets:

```
python ditdml/tools/visualize_triplets.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type quasi_original --seed 23 --subset-name test --initial-triplet-index 200
python ditdml/tools/visualize_triplets.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class --class-triplet-conversion-type all_instances --seed 23 --subset-name training --initial-triplet-index 315715
python ditdml/tools/visualize_triplets.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class --class-triplet-conversion-type prototypes --seed 23 --subset-name validation --initial-triplet-index 42
python ditdml/tools/visualize_triplets.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class_same_training_validation --class-triplet-conversion-type all_instances --seed 23 --subset-name test --initial-triplet-index 101
python ditdml/tools/visualize_triplets.py --dataset-name things --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --split-type by_class_same_training_validation --class-triplet-conversion-type prototypes --seed 23 --subset-name training --initial-triplet-index 22
```

(press left, right arrows)

To interactively visualize neighbors according to the provided embedding:

```
python ditdml/tools/visualize_neighbors.py --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT} --num-neighbors 4 --initial-class-index 1854
```

(press left, right arrows)

To interactively visualize the similarity matrix together with image pairs:

```
python ditdml/tools/visualize_similarity_matrix.py --data-directory-name {THINGS_ROOT}
```

(click on matrix elements in left pane)
